IndexedDB, we mention IndexedDB a lot.
Sometimes we call the API IDB, okay?
It's like Maximiliano,
that's a long name, Max, okay?.
So we have IDB for IndexedDB.
So IndexedDB is a NoSQL data store or
database if you want.
We are going to be using IndexedDB 2.0
that is the one available on every browser
and as I mentioned before,
it's just a difference in the API,
not actually in the data itself.
In fact, this is an implementation
agnostic as many web specs.
So the spec that actually say how
the browser needs to store the data.
The spec just mentions best practices and
the public interface that we use.
But how it's implemented behind
the scenes, we don't know.
Is the browser using SQLite?
I don't know.
Is the browser using them fine?
We don't know and we don't care which
exact implementation the browser has for
the data.
IndexedDB stores JavaScript objects,
bytes.
It can also store simple
data like strings or
numbers or booleans.
It's not common that we do that but
it's possible.
And every entry typically has a key,
typically.
There is one option I will explain in
a second where it's not necessary.
So every entries, every object,
every value that we say should have
a primary key so we can identify
that element within the store, okay?
The API is asynchronous, so
that's good for performance.
That's the main reason why we
are replacing web storage with IndexedDB.
There is no permission from
the user as web storage, okay?
It's available on Windows, Workers and
Service Workers, so you can use
these databases from threads and also
you can use them from service workers.
So it's a simple way to send and
receive or
store data that every thread in your
web app can actually use and access.
When storing objects, this is a warning,
IndexedDB clones them.
In fact what you can store in IndexedDB,
everything that can be
cloned in JavaScript, okay?
Cloning happens synchronously.
So the API is synchronously,
so it's asynchronous,
but the part where we
are cloning the object, no.
Meaning that you may still have
performance penalties if you're
storing very large objects because those
objects will be cloned in the same thread.
The solution to that is to
use IndexedDB in a worker.
Make sense?
A worker is a thread.
So then in that case, the cloning
will happen in a thread as well.
But that's for
some special niche situations where
you have really large objects, okay?
Make sense?
Cool, the original API so
the API in the browser is event-based.
So on error, on success,
on upgrade, or add event listener,
so it's not promise base.
So it's like an old API, okay?
But we are going to use a thin
wrapper that everyone uses these days
that converts it's very thin
that compressed it's around 1k.
So it's really a small library.
So we can convert IndexedDB
into promise-based API.
So we can use async await ,our code
looks better, nicer, cleaner, okay?
And we use everything
we know from promises.
IndexDB support transactions.
The original API is
only transaction based.
So I'm not sure if all of
you are into databases.
But a transaction means that
you open a transaction,
you can do a lot of operations and
then you commit the transaction.
And if any of the operational or
the queries that you were executing fails,
the whole transaction rolls
back to its original position.
That's the idea of a transaction.
Everything or nothing, okay?
Well it supports transactions and
that was actually really painful for
us for web developers because if you
just want one query to get data or
you want to save data,
you always need a transaction, okay?
But the thin wrapper that we will
use has automatic transactions for
the most common situations.
So then we may we forget about
transactions if we actually don't need
them because it's a single operation,
make sense?
It also supports DB versioning.
I will explain what
that means in a minute.
But yeah, we are a web app, right?
The user is accessing our web app today,
okay?
And then five years later, it comes back.
The data is still there.
Am I using the same database,
the same schema, the same data stores?
Am I expecting the same kind
of data as five years ago?
Well every time we are changing
the schema of our database, so
the kind of objects that we store,
we can change the version, okay?
And we have a system that let us or
it's helping
us into migrate the data between versions.
Make sense?
On top of IndexedDB,
there are many libraries for
example, SQL on IndexedDB,
JsStore, sqlite worker.
These are libraries that you can use
within your project that they are sitting
on top of IndexedDB and they're
offering you a different interface for
example SQL base.
Do you want select star from clients?
Yeah, go ahead.
You can still do that using
one of these libraries.
You have web storage on IndexedDB.
There are actually two libraries,
one on libraries idb-localstorage and
localforage.
Localforage was created
by the Mozilla team,
that they offer you a very simple API
similar to local storage like set item,
get item but as with promises,
that's the only difference.
And they're using IndexedDB
behind the scenes, okay?
And there are other APIs
as well that will offer you
other like public interface like dexie,
ORMs.
So where you just save objects and
those objects will go
automatically to IndexedDB.
So then if you use these libraries,
you forget about IndexedDB.
You just learn how to use the library,
okay?
Anyway here we are going to use
not the very low level API,
we're going to use the promise
based wrapper at least, okay?
So we have an origin, so a domain kind of.
That origin can have different databases.
What's the database?
A name, so we provide a name, that's all.
Every database that you create can
contain different object stores.
This is kind of the table
on classic databases, okay?
So instead of tables,
here we have object stores.
And instead of records,
here we have objects.
And every object store should actually
contain objects of different types, okay?
That's the hierarchy of elements
that we have in IndexedDB.
Actually on every object store,
you even don't need to have
objects of the same kind.
It's a good practice,
a good pattern, okay?
But not a need.
In fact,
IndexedDB has nothing known as a schema.
You don't define the schema.
The schema is kind of okay,
which properties the object will have?
Hey, which type should be?
Well we don't have that.
We just store objects.
We have a primary key and
we also have indexes.
And we're going to talk
about that in a minute.
Do you have any question
on this structure?
So database, object stores and
then options.
So we open an IndexedDB
database with the name and
the version number such as my menu,
the coffee menu,
the coffee masters menu and
the version number.
This is version one, okay?
Then the browser checks if first,
if that database exists so
there is no create database.
We just open the database, okay?
So but
first it checks if it's there or not.
If it's not there, okay?
It would trigger an event
known as upgrade.
This is the first part
where you say upgrade?
But it didn't exist so why am I upgrading?
Well that's how the API works.
So there is an event
with the name upgrade.
In that event, we will see in
a minute how we use that event.
In that event,
we create the data stores, okay?
So we create the data store in that event.
That means like okay, initialize your
database because it doesn't exist, okay?
That's kind of the idea.
It's a place where we're going
to initialize the database.
And after that, it's success.
So it's open.
It's ready to use.
Makes sense?
Well what happens if the database
that I wanna open already exists.
In that case, we check the version number.
Is the version number that
you wanna open this one
greater than the one in the browser?
So I'm opening version three.
The browser checks that in the browser,
we have version one, okay?
Makes sense?
If it's yes,
it also triggers the same upgrade event.
You have some arguments there and you will
know that you are coming from version one.
And it's up to you what do you want to do?
Like the user is on version one,
it has data.
With the schema in version one,
what do you want to do?
Do you want to migrate
the data to a new schema?
You make the decision.
And if it's no, so
it's not greater than, so
it can be equals or less than,
it checks if it's equal.
If it's equal to the browser,
it's success, okay?
So you want version two?
I have version two, okay.
You can use the database.
But what if it's not?
So I'm opening version two,
and you have version 15.
The browser triggers an error.
So it's an embedded situation.
It doesn't make sense that the current
web app it's opening version two and
the browser has version 15 already saved.
Make sense?
So that's how IndexedDB versioning works.